Preface
Psychology at the beginning of the twenty-first century has become a highly diverse field of scientific study and applied technology. Psychologists commonly regard their discipline as the science of behavior, and the American Psychological Association has formally designated 2000 to 2010 as the “Decade of Behavior”. The pursuits of behavioral scientists range from the natural sciences to the social sciences and embrace a wide variety of objects of investigation. Some psychologists have more in common with biologists than with most other psychologists, and some have more in common with sociologists than with most of their psychological colleagues. Some psychologists are interested primarily in the behavior of animals, some in the behavior of people, and others in the behavior of organizations. These and other dimensions of difference among psychological scientists are matched by equal if not greater heterogeneity among psychological practitioners, who currently apply a vast array of methods in many different settings to achieve highly varied purpose.
Psychology has been rich in comprehensive encyclopedias and in handbooks devoted to specific topics in the field. However, there has not previously been any single handbook designed to cover the broad scope of psychological science and practice. The present 12-volume Handbook of Psychology was conceived to occupy this place in the literature. Leading national and international scholars and practitioners have collaborated to produce 297 authoritative and detailed chapters covering all fundamental facets of the discipline, and the Handbook has been organized to capture the breadth and diversity of psychology and to encompass interests and concerns shared by psychologists in all branches of the field.
Two unifying threads run through the science of behavior. The first is a common history rooted in conceptual and empirical approaches to understanding the nature of behavior. The specific histories of all specialty areas in psychology trace their origins to the formulations of the classical philosophers and the methodology of the early experimentalists, and appreciation for the historical evolution of psychology in all of its variations transcends individual identities as being one kind of psychologist or another. Accordingly, Volume 1 in the Handbook is devoted to the history of psychology as it emerged in many areas of scientific study and applied technology.
A second unifying thread in psychology is a commitment to the development and utilization of research methods suitable for collecting and analyzing behavioral data. With attention both to specific procedures and their application in particular settings, Volume 2 addresses research methods in psychology.
Volumes 3 through 7 of the Handbook present the substantive content of psychological knowledge in five broad areas of study: biological psychology (Volume 3), experimental psychology (Volume 4), personality and social psychology (Volume 5), developmental psychology (Volume 6), and educational psychology (Volume 7). Volumes 8 through 12 address the application of psychological knowledge in five broad areas of professional practice: clinical psychology (Volume 8), health psychology (Volume 9), assessment psychology (Volume10), forensic psychology (Volume 11), and industrial and organizational psychology (Volume 12). Each of these volumes reviews what is currently known in these areas of study and application and identifies pertinent sources of information in the literature. Each discusses unresolved issues and unanswered questions and proposes future directions in conceptualization, research, and practice. Each of the volumes also reflects the investment of scientific psychologists in practical applications of their findings and the attention of applied psychologists to the scientific basis of their methods.
The Handbook of Psychology was prepared for the purpose of educating and informing readers about the present state of psychological knowledge and about anticipated advances in behavior science research and practice. With this purpose in mind, the individual Handbook volumes address the needs and interests of three groups. First, for graduate students in behavioral science, the volumes provide advanced instruction in the basic concepts and methods that define the fields they cover, together with a review of current knowledge, core literature, and likely future developments. Second, in addition to serving as graduate textbooks, the volumes offer professional psychologists an opportunity to read and contemplate the views of distinguished colleagues concerning the central thrusts of research and leading edges of practice in their respective fields. Third, for psychologists seeking to become conversant with fields outside their own specialty and for persons outside of psychology seeking information about psychological matters, the handbook volumes serve as a reference source for expanding their knowledge and directing them to additional sources in the literature.
The preparation of this Handbook was made possible by the diligence and scholarly sophistication of the 25 volume editors and co-editors who constituted the Editorial Board. As Editor-in-Chief, I want to thank each of them for the pleasure of their collaboration in this project. I compliment them for having recruited an outstanding cast of contributors to their volumes and then working closely with these authors to achieve chapters that will stand each in their own right as valuable contributions to the literature. I would like finally to express my appreciation to the editorial staff of John Wiley and Sons for the opportunity to share in the development of this project and its pursuit to fruition, most particularly to Jennifer Simon, Senior Editor, and her two assistants, Mary Porterfield and Isabel Pratt. Without Jennifer’s vision of the Handbook and her keen judgment and unflagging support in producing it, the occasion to write this preface would not have arrived.
Volume 1 Preface
Numerous histories of our relatively young field have been published. The Library of Congress lists 44 history of psychology titles, beginning with G. S. Brett in 1912 to Leahey in 2000, an author in this volume. More histories may have been written without the word history in the title, but that still means a history every two years. And now we add the 45th.
Writing history is not easy. First, there is too much to record, and the selection process inevitably involves bias. Then there is distortion in hindsight. Any history of the field should be called, “A Partial History…” or even “A Slanted History…,” but those titles are understandably undesirable. So, as John Popplestone comments in his introduction, we present a partial history of selected topics.
In keeping with the diverse nature of this Handbook of Psychology, we have attempted to provide a comprehensive history—at least one that covers a broad spectrum from our wide-ranging fields of study. The first two chapters are general overviews of psychology as a science and as a profession. These are followed by several basic areas that typically are included in a core curriculum in a graduate program. We then cover a number of major professional areas and lastly three areas of special interest.
The chapter on ethnic minorities is notably different from the others in that it consists of vignettes reflecting on historical events, some very personal, that have characterized the field’s perception and interaction with minority groups. The chapter on international psychology includes a unique time line of events covering more than three millennia. Several of the other chapters contain events and stories that have not been recorded in other publications.
We hope that the History is both interesting and useful—and that the contributions provide an informative launching pad for this very comprehensive Handbook of Psychology. Many people have helped in the process of completing the History. First and foremost are the chapter authors, whose contributions have made the volume possible. A number of persons have read and helped edit chapters: Douglas Detterman, James Overholser, Milton Strauss, Diane Tice, Erik Youngstrom, Gerda Freedheim, and Matt Heimback. I also would like to thank a group of editorial advisors who gave advice early on the contributors and organization of the text: David B. Baker, Florence L. Denmark, Wade E. Pickren, Milton E. Strauss, Wayne Viney, and especially Michael Wertheimer for his helpful counsel. Three staff from the Department of Psychology at Case Western Reserve University have been invaluable with their technical help and patience with a fussy editor: Felicia Bruce, Cynthia Hendrick, and Kori Kosek. Elsie Finley, librarian at CWRU, was tenacious in her pursuit of obscure references. The editors, Jennifer Simon and Isabel Pratt from John Wiley & Sons, were always helpful and encouraging, as well as the staff of Publications Development Company. And lastly, a special thanks to the general editor of the Handbook, Irving Weiner, for his patience, careful reviewing of drafts, and constant encouragement.


REFERENCES
Brett, G. S. (1912). A history of psychology. London: G. Allen.
Leahey, T. H. (2000). History of psychology: Main currents in
psychological thought (5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.

Foreword
The History of Psychology is the most recent contribution in a long tradition of the presentation of an account of the important historical developments and landmarks in the field of psychology.
In the beginning, when there were only a few psychologists (in 1892 the new American Psychological Association had 31 charter members), there were some who could reasonably be described as possessing the whole, or at least a significant part, of psychology in their consciousness. However, the ability to speak with authority on the whole of the field of psychology is now no longer in the hands of any single person or source. (A vestigial remnant of this tradition of “universal psychological knowledge” is in the expectation that a doctoral student in psychology should be able to take, and pass, a “comprehensive” examination on the whole field of psychology’s subject matter and methodology.) And, the tradition of the comprehensive history of the whole field is also still with us in the vast textbooks that now introduce the area to so many undergraduates—some of which have almost a thousand pages!
But we must grant that the task is an impossible one and anyone who attempts to carry it out will face serious problems. Someone smart enough to solve this problem is smart enough not to try. But, if being smart is not enough and we do decide to take on the task, who will be selected to undertake it and how will they be instructed to go about the actual work? What criteria of selection are in play? If your favorite topic is included, is something else that I really like going to be excluded?
Psychology’s history, even if confined to the United States since 1879, is so large and so various that it is probably beyond attempts to cover the whole field in any comprehensive manner. Instead, the editor has wisely elected to sample the field so that a description of the part will indicate the possibilities of the whole.
Can we justify the particular sample of psychology that the editor has arranged here? Since there is no objective standard for inclusion or exclusion, we must honor the scholarship and integrity of the editor even if there is a nagging doubt: “How could the volume omit semiotics, or the activity of Raymond Dodge at Yale in 1924?” The solution is to follow the advice of Aristotle who counseled the observer to suspend disbelief… and to get with it.
This author is an unindicted co-conspirator in an attempt to list and define the one hundred most important (central) concepts in general psychology. In the Dictionary of Concepts in General Psychology (Popplestone & McPherson, 1988), the publisher selected the number 100 (presumably for its commercial utility), but we coauthors were given complete freedom to compile the list and write the definitions. We decided that there was no really satisfactory way to define the 100 core concepts, so we charged ahead on our own using the indices of several introductory textbooks, the topics in annual reviews, similar informal sampling techniques, and our own intense conversations. There comes a time when one must bite the bullet and just do it, even though this leaves a wide target for the cheap shot of the reviewer who asks, “By what criteria were these concepts selected?” but does not offer a feasible and useful alternative.
Qualitative and quantitative judgments of relevance or impact, however carefully made and subsequently justified, cannot be utterly free of criticism and appraisal. In the vast extended field of contemporary psychology there will always be differences of opinion about selection and emphasis—often advocated with great enthusiasm.
If psychology is too large and too variable to be totally inclusive, then we have a similar problem in the selection of the observers. There is no one today who would be so bold as to present him- or herself as having a complete grasp of the whole of the field, to be able to present the kind of detailed, thoughtful history that the readers may reasonably expect.
The editor of the History of Psychology has found a solution to these problems in the judicious sampling of the content areas and the careful selection of authors to write about them, while also allowing the authors the intellectual freedom to deal with the content as their experience and consideration allow.
History of Psychology is a unique volume. There is nothing quite like it available for the individual scholar or students, and so it fills a rather special and useful niche that would otherwise be vacant. Partly this is done by using a team of experts in the many topic areas into which contemporary psychology may be compartmentalized. And this new account of an old program is broadened by the recognition that modern psychology acknowledges that it is an applied technology as well as an academic, “scientific” discipline, in which the preservation and acquisition of knowledge about the subject matter is an end in itself.
History of Psychology is intended to be graduate-level text or even appropriate at an advanced undergraduate level. It may also serve as a resource for those seeking a historical overview of a number of the scientific and professional areas in the vast field of psychology.
The editor of History of Psychology has defined the field be specifying that each chapter can be seen as a distinct, identifiable, quasi-independent area of knowledge or advocacy. Each topic may well have separate societies or interest groups, with newsletters, prizes, officers, journals, and so forth—the usual structures that manage to define the boundaries and content of an area.
This greater summary of the history-of-psychology-in-our-times begins with two chapters that define the current field and its discontents: psychology-as-a-science and psychology-as-a-profession. Then, in media res the content of psychology is presented in the early chapters, which echo the classical topics, as in the headings of every introductory textbook. Following are a reflection more of contemporary psychology-as-application than as content areas. There is overlap, of course, since no area of application is without its support in content. In the later chapters, the shift is from application in the public good to the problems of the professional psychologist and international developments. Finally the last chapter on professional organizations is a description of the field of psychology from the inside, as issues of affiliation and identification are described.
It is apparent to the editor and the authors, that the division of pure versus applied, academic versus guild, and so forth break down, and that psychologist work both in an area of investigation and one of application. The selection of topics has been guided by both classical and innovative standards. While the chapters dealing with substantive psychological topics (theoretical and empirical) are familiar selections, it is the two introductory chapters and latter ones that are innovative and reflect the new world of psychology, in contrast to that shown in older histories (Boring, Murphy, etc.) or the whole-of-psychology handbooks.
The selection of authors and their instructions in proceeding with their tasks are also innovative and worth noticing. Several of the authors are universally recognized as noted scientists and have been leaders in their respective fields for years. But a number are young and drawn from the pool of new historians by choice. Many psychologists are unaware that there is a whole cohort of (mostly young) psychologists whose involvement in the history of psychology is not just a hobby or peripheral interest. These people are committed to psychology as their major discipline but are also fully committed to the study and writing of good histories of psychology. The era when history was taught by the oldest or youngest member of the department by default is long past, and now there is a cadre of skilled, sophisticated scholars who are committed to creating a quality history of psychology.
When the authors were selected and had accepted the invitation to contribute, they were given a great deal of freedom to write a history of their topical area in their own manner, organization, and time scheme, but they were all requested that after being given freedom to organize, emphasize, and structure their subject matter they were also requested to adhere to a similar length and style and to serve more recent (twentieth century) content as well as move remote temporal themes.
In other words, the editor asked the authors to be observant of a minimum number of restrictions (designed to make the volume and the reader’s task easier) while at the same time allowing the authors the intellectual freedom to deal with their subject matter as they wished. To these ends the authors have striven to present a text which may well serve as a milestone in the continuing quest to document our growing and diverse field of psychology.


REFERENCE
Popplestone, J. A., & McPherson, M. W. (1988). Dictionary of concepts
in general psychology. New York: Greenwood.

Psychology as a Science
	ORIGINS OF SCIENTIFIC PSYCHOLOGY
Historical accounts of the development of scientific psychology place the origins of the discipline in Germany at about the middle of the nineteenth century. The ferment produced by British and continental philosophies of mind and the advances of research in sensory physiology provided the immediate context for the beginning of the new psychology. The pursuit of knowledge about mind and its processes has a history that is embedded in the history of philosophy. The late-eighteenth-century declaration that a true scientific study of the mind was not possible posed a challenge that was answered in the nineteenth century when the possibility of a scientific study of mind emerged within philosophy by the adoption of the experimental methods employed to study the physiology of the senses. The synergy of these nineteenth-century developments gave impetus to the “new psychology” whose history embodies continued efforts to develop and maintain psychology as a scientific discipline and to extend the methods of science to an ever-widening field of inquiry within the discipline.
The Philosophical Context
Christian Wolff (1679-1754) first popularized the term psychology to designate the study of mind. Wolff divided the discipline between empirical and rational psychology. The data of mind that resulted from observing ourselves and others constituted empirical psychology; rational psychology referred to the interpretation of the data of empirical psychology through the use of reason and logic. These psychologies were characterized as using knowledge acquired through experience (empirical psychology) or using knowledge that the mind possesses independent of experience (rational psychology) (Murray, 1988).
